Title: On communities: When should change happen?
Date: 2017-02-13
Author: Flavio Percoco
Tags: openstack,python,communities,open-source
Slug: on-communities-when-should-change-happen

One common rule of engineering (and not only engineering, really) is that you
don't change something that is not broken. In this context, broken doesn't only
refer to totally broken things. It could refer to a piece of code becoming
obsolete, or a part of the software not performing well anymore, etc. The point
is that it doesn't matter how sexy the change you want to make is, if there's no
good reason to make it, then don't. Because the moment you do, you'll break what
isn't broken (or known to be broken, at the very least).

Good practices are good for some things, not everything and even the one
mentioned above is not an exception. Trying to apply this practice to everything
in our lives and everywhere in our jobs is not going to bring the results one
would expect. We will soon end up with stalled processes or even worse, as it's
the case for communities, we may be dictating the death of the thing we are
applying this practice on.

When it comes to communities, I am a strong believer that the sooner we try to
improve things, the more we will avoid future issues that could damage our
community. If we know there are things that can be improved and we don't do it
because there are no signs of the community being broken, we will, in most
cases, be damaging the community. Hopefully the example below will help
understanding the point I'm making.

Take OpenStack as an example. It's a fully distributed community with people
from pretty much everywhere in the world. What this really means is that there
are people from different cultures, whose first language is not English, that
live in different timezones. One common issues with every new team in OpenStack
is finding the best way to communicate across the team. Should the team use IRC?
Should the team try video first? Should the team do both? What time is the best
time to meet? etc.

The defacto standard mean of communication for instant messaging in OpenStack is
IRC. It's accessible from everywhere, it's written, it's logged and it's open.
It has been around for ages and it has been used by the community since the very
beginning. Some teams, however, have chosen video over IRC because it's just
faster. The amount of things that can be covered in a 1h-long call are normally
more than the ones covered in a 1h-long IRC meeting. For **some** people it's
just easier and faster to talk. For some people. Not everyone, just some people.
The community is distributed and diverse, remember?

Now, without getting into the details of whether IRC is better than video calls,
let's assume a new (or existing team) decides to start doing video calls. Let's
also assume that the technology used is accessible everywhere (no G+ because it
is blocked in China, for example) and that the video calls are recorded and made
public. For the current size and members of the hypothetical team, video calls
are ok. Members feel comfortable and they can all attend at a reasonable time.
Technically, there's nothing broken with this setup. Technically, the team could
keep using video calls until something happens, until someone actually
complains, until something breaks.

This is exactly where problems begin. In a multi-cultural environment we ought
to consider that not everyone is used to speaking up and complaining. While I
agree the best way to improve a community is by people speaking up, we also have
to take into account those who don't do it because they are just not used to it.
Based on the scenario described above, these folks are still not part of the
project's team and they likely won't be because in order for them to participate
in the community, they would have to give up part of who they are.

For the sake of discussion, let's assume that these folks can attend the call
but they are not native English speakers. At this point the problem becomes the
language barrier. The language barrier is always higher than your level of
extroversion. Meaning, you can be a very extrovert person but not being able to
speak the language fluently will leave you off of some discussions, which will
likely end up in frustration. Written forms of expression are easier than spoken
ones. Our brain has more time to process them, reason about them and
apply/correct the login before it even tries to come out of our fingers. The
same is not true for spoken communication.

I don't want to get too hung up on the video vs IRC discussion, to be honest.
The point made is that, when it comes to communities, waiting for people to
complain, or for things to be broken, is the wrong approach. Sit down and
reflect how you can make the community better, what things are slowing down its
growth and what changes would help you be more inclusive. Waiting until there is
an actual problem may be the death of your community. The last thing you want to
do is to drive the wrong people away.
